---
name: Scarlet Oak
id: 29209155-3019-4397-b130-6396c0d0de33
species: coccinea
genus: Quercus
family: Fagaceae
---
Summary



Quercus coccinea, the scarlet oak, is a deciduous tree in the red oak section Lobatae of the genus Quercus, in the family Fagaceae. It can be mistaken for the pin oak, the black oak, or occasionally the red oak. On the scarlet oak the sinuses between lobes are "C"-shaped in comparison to pin oak, Quercus palustris, which has U-shaped sinuses and the acorns are half covered by a deep cap.It is primarily distributed in the central and eastern United States, from southern Maine west to Wisconsin, Michigan and Missouri, and south as far as Louisiana, Alabama, and Georgia. It occurs on dry, sandy, usually acidic soils. It is often an important canopy species in oak–heath forests.
Description
Quercus coccinea is a medium to large deciduous tree growing to 20–30 m (66–98 ft) tall with an open, rounded crown.
The leaves are glossy green, 7–17 cm (2.8–6.7 in) long and 8–13 cm (3.1–5.1 in) broad, with seven lobes, and deep sinuses between the lobes. Each lobe has 3–7 bristle-tipped teeth. The leaf is hairless (unlike the related pin oak (Quercus palustris), which has tufts of pale orange-brown down where the lobe veins join the central vein). The common English name is derived from the fall (autumn) coloration of the foliage, which generally becomes bright scarlet; in contrast, pin oak foliage generally turns bronze in autumn.
The acorns are ovate, 7–13 mm broad and 17–31 mm long, a third to a half covered in a deep cup, green maturing pale brown about 18 months after pollination; the kernel is very bitter.


Uses
Scarlet oak is sometimes planted as an ornamental tree, popular for its bright red fall color. The cultivar 'Splendens' has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.Scarlet oak has an excellent red color during the fall months and is typically grown for shade and ornamental purposes. The red oak is a popular selection for lumber and is commonly as flooring material.Scarlet oak wood has a light to medium color consisting of reds and browns. The scarlet oak has a fairly course texture with relatively large pore size. The durability of scarlet oak is less than the white oak which has a higher level of decay and rot resistance. Scarlet oak lumber is easy to glue and looks attractive after staining and finishing. Has a distinct appealing smell common with most oaks.Oak has been classified as a sensitizer although it doesn't cause many allergic reactions. Reactions include eye and skin irritations along with asthma like symptoms, but not severe.White oak is typically more expensive than scarlet oak; red oak is in good supply with reasonable pricing which makes it a very popular lumber product throughout the USA.Scarlet oak is commonly used in furniture, cabinetry, interior trim, flooring, and veneer. Scarlet oak shares many characteristics with red oak and often falls in the same category as red oak (Quercus rubra) in a broad sense 
Growth and yield
A mature scarlet oak grows to be around 18-24 feet where the max height is approximately 100 feet. It's a medium size tree which grows fast and matures relatively early. Economic maturity ranges from 65-100 feet in height, depending on location and environmental factors.The scarlet oak typically grows to about 50-70 feet in height while remaining 40-50 feet in width, they need full exposure to sunlight for best growth. Preferred soil is on the dry to somewhat dry range, well drained, and acidic soil. Flower color is yellow to green depending on season.
The scarlet oak sets a deep growing taproot that makes successful transplanting almost impossible. Planting a larger tree means it will need a lot of healing before it is ready to continue growing. Fertilizer is unnecessary for growth.

Medicinal uses
Quercus coccinea produces galls from insect interactions which may be used to treat hemorrhages, chronic diarrhea and dysentery.
Wildlife value
This tree acts as a shelter to animals such as birds and squirrels, but it is also a temporary home to moth larvae throughout the months of the year. It also provides food in the form of acorns to many animals such as woodpeckers, blue jays, small mammals, wild turkey, white-tailed deer, and black bear. Many species of wildlife look towards the Q. coccinea for shelter such as smaller to medium sized birds, as well as small mammals.
Conservation status
Red oak is not listed in the CITES Appendices or on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.
Forestry
April and May are flowering months for the scarlet oak, factors such as elevation and weather play a big role in the flowering process during this time. It takes about two seasons for the acorns to mature following maturation. Acorns provide food to numerous  animals. Scarlet oak is prominent as a co-component of forests including species such as white oak, black oak and northern red oak. When at a lower elevation surrounding the Appalachian Mountains, it is a common component of pine forests and heaths. 
Oak seeds are faster growing seeds than many other trees and can compete very successfully. To regenerate oaks, the oak saplings should be 4-5 feet tall before removing the over-story. To favor oak regeneration, non-oak stems in the understory exceeding 4 feet can be controlled by a variety of methods. The quality of the environment impacts oak regenerationSeed production starts when the tree is about 20 years old, seed production reaches a maximum at approximately 50 years of age. The seed production (masting) is highly variable with a good masting year occurring every 3-5 years depending on the weather and environment.

Insect pests
Cryphonectria parasitica, a bark pathogen, has been known to infect scarlet oak trees particularly in Pennsylvania. Cankers were found on many of these trees due to this parasite during 1989 and 1990, the parasite was removed from 69.7% of infected areas and recovered from 67% of incidents. Gypsy moths are known to defoliate a scarlet oak which can kill the tree. Other defoliationing insects capable of killing the scarlet oaks, include oak leafier (Crosia semipurpurana), fall cankerworm (Alsophila pometaria), forest tent caterpillar (Malacosoma disstria), and walking stick (Diapheromera femoral).A few species of insects bore into the scarlet oak bark and trunk, these species include towline chestnut borer (Agrilus bilineatus), red oak borer (Enaphalodes ruffles), oak timber worm (Arrhenodes minutus), Ambrosia beetles (Platypus spp.) and Xyleborus spp.), and the larvae of carpenter worms (Prionoxystus spp.).Galls are commonly found on smaller twigs and limbs due to the gall wasp (Callirhytis quercuepuntata). The oak-apple gall wasp (Amphibolips confluenta) causes gall growth on leaves and petioles. Black carpenter ants (Camponotus pennsylvanicus) are known for nesting in the scarlet oak trees.'Oak decline' can be caused by drought, moth defoliation, age, fire, environmental causes, and other factors. From 1968 to 1972, 27% of scarlet oak population in the Newark watershed in New Jersey died from the gypsy moth defoliation which came before the towline chestnut borer and shoestring root rot attack.
References
Johnson, Paul S. (1990). "Quercus coccinea".  In Burns, Russell M.; Honkala, Barbara H. (eds.). Hardwoods. Silvics of North America. Washington, D.C.: United States Forest Service (USFS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2 – via Southern Research Station (www.srs.fs.fed.us).External links
Quercus coccinea images from Vanderbilt Unitersity 
Interactive Distribution Map of Quercus coccinea
photo of herbarium specimen at Missouri Botanical Garden, collected in Missouri in 1932
Uses

["Scarlet oak is sometimes planted as an ornamental tree, popular for its bright red fall color. The cultivar 'Splendens' has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.[8][9]\n", 'Scarlet oak has an excellent red color during the fall months and is typically grown for shade and ornamental purposes. The red oak is a popular selection for lumber and is commonly as flooring material.[10]\n', 'Scarlet oak wood has a light to medium color consisting of reds and browns. The scarlet oak has a fairly course texture with relatively large pore size. The durability of scarlet oak is less than the white oak which has a higher level of decay and rot resistance. Scarlet oak lumber is easy to glue and looks attractive after staining and finishing. Has a distinct appealing smell common with most oaks.[11]\n', "Oak has been classified as a sensitizer although it doesn't cause many allergic reactions. Reactions include eye and skin irritations along with asthma like symptoms, but not severe.[12]\n", 'White oak is typically more expensive than scarlet oak; red oak is in good supply with reasonable pricing which makes it a very popular lumber product throughout the USA.[13]\n', 'Scarlet oak is commonly used in furniture, cabinetry, interior trim, flooring, and veneer. Scarlet oak shares many characteristics with red oak and often falls in the same category as red oak (Quercus rubra) in a broad sense [14]\n']
